"picture-1.png\n\nFree Grammar\n\nE-Book\n\nLevel 1\n\nTable of Contents\n\n| Present Simple: To Be……………………………………………………………………       | 4   |\n|-------------------------------------------------------|-----|\n| Possessives……………………………………………………………………………………           | 6   |\n| Articles: A, An, The ………………………………………………………………………      | 7   |\n| This, That, These, Those………………………………………………………………      | 8   |\n| Present Simple………………………………………………………………………………          | 10  |\n| Can / Can't / Have to / Don't Have to………………………………………… | 14  |\n| Prepositions: In, At, On…………………………………………………………………     | 15  |\n| Past Simple: To Be…………………………………………………………………………        | 17  |\n| Past Simple: Regular Verbs…………………………………………………………… 18  |     |\n| Past Simple: Irregular Verbs…………………………………………………………    | 20  |\n| There is / There are………………………………………………………………………       | 22  |\n| Present Continuous………………………………………………………………………… 23     |     |\n| Present Simple or Continuous………………………………………………………     | 26  |\n| Countable and Uncountable…………………………………………………………       | 27  |\n| Future with Going To……………………………………………………………………        | 29  |\n| Comparative Adjectives…………………………………………………………………       | 31  |\n| Superlative Adjectives……………………………………………………………………      | 34  |\n| Adverbs…………………………………………………………………………………………… 36         |     |\n| Present Perfect: Verb be…………………………………………………………………38   |     |\n| Present Perfect: Other Verbs…………………………………………………………    | 40  |\n| Present Perfect or Past Simple………………………………………………………   | 42  |\n\n## Welcome!\n\nEspresso English has fun, fast online English lessons every week! The lessons include reading, listening, vocabulary, grammar, and practice exercises. If you have a question, you can contact the teacher.\n\nThis book teaches beginner-level grammar topics with links to grammar exercises on the website. Espresso English will publish intermediate and advanced level grammar books in the future - so sign up for the e-mails to get news about books, courses, and other products.\n\nThis Grammar e-Book is free - so please share it with your friends. I hope you enjoy it!\n\n- -Shayna Oliveira\n\nEspressoEnglish.net\n\n## Present Simple: Be\n\n## Positive:\n\n| I  am             | I'm                      | from Japan.   |\n|-------------------|--------------------------|---------------|\n| you / we / they   | you're / we're / they're | from Brazil.  |\n| he / she / it  is | he's / she's / it's      | from India.   |\n\n## Negative:\n\n| I  am not                | I'm not                                                                   | married.   |\n|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|\n| you / we / they  are not | You're not / You aren't  We're not / We aren't  They're not / They aren't | happy.     |\n| he / she / it is not     | He isn't / He's not  She isn't / She's not  It isn't / It's not           | a student. |\n\n## Question:$\\_{ }$\n\n| I               |            | Am  beautiful?   |\n|-----------------|------------|------------------|\n| you / we / they | a teacher? | Are              |\n| he / she / it   | tall?      | Is               |\n\n## Present Simple: Be\n\n## Name:\n\n- I'm Joanna.\n- He's Paulo.\n- They're Aki and Yuta.\n\n## Country / Nationality:\n\n- I'm from the U.S. I'm American.\n- My husband is from Italy. He's Italian.\n- She's not Korean, she's Vietnamese.\n- Are they from Australia?\n\n## Age:\n\n- I'm 27 years old.\n- How old are you?\n- She's 15.\n- My mother is 65 years old.\n\n## Emotions:\n\n- I'm sad.\n- She's excited.\n- You're angry.\n- We're happy.\n\n## Jobs:\n\n- I'm not a student. I'm a teacher.\n- Are you a doctor?\n- He's a journalist.\n- They're artists.\n\nGrammar Exercise: Present Simple: Be\n\n## Possessives\n\n| NOUN    | POSSESSIVE   | EXAMPLE                                        |\n|---------|--------------|------------------------------------------------|\n| I       | my           | My  name is Sandra.                            |\n| you     | your         | What's  your  name?                            |\n| he      | his          | His  name is John.                             |\n| she     | her          | Her  computer is fast.                         |\n| it      | its          | My car is old, so  its  engine isn't powerful. |\n| we      | our          | Our  apartment is in the city center.          |\n| they    | their        | My parents sold  their  house.                 |\n| Mary    | Mary's       | Mary's  phone number is 555-4321.              |\n| Joe     | Joe's        | Joe's  favorite color is green.                |\n| the boy | the boy's    | The  boy's  clothes are dirty.                 |\n| friends | friends'     | My  friends'  names are Patrick and Gloria.    |\n| cat     | cat's        | My  cat's  name is Ginger.                     |\n| country | country's    | My  country's  flag is red, white, and blue.   |\n\nDon't confuse its (possessive) with it's (contraction for \"it is\")!\n\n- The cat ate it's food\n- The cat ate its food.\n- Its illegal for a 17-year-old to buy alcohol.\n- It's illegal for a 17-year-old to buy alcohol.\n\nGrammar Exercise: Possessives\n\n## Articles: A, An, The\n\nI'm going to eat an apple.\n\npicture-2.png\n\nI'm going to eat the red apple.\n\n| a / an   | general (one of   | I want to buy  a  car.  He's eating  an  apple.   |\n|----------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------|\n|          | many)             |                                                   |\n|          |                   | Do you have  a  bike?                             |\n|          |                   | She is  an  old woman.                            |\n|          |                   | I'm reading  a  book.                             |\n| the      | specific          | Tokyo is  the  capital of Japan.                  |\n|          | (one  specific)   | The  new Chinese restaurant is very good.         |\n|          |                   | We like  the  blue car.                           |\n|          |                   | The  girl in the red dress is beautiful.          |\n|          |                   | I'm reading  the                                  |\n|          |                   | new book by J.K. Rowling.                         |\n\npicture-3.png\n\n## Articles: A, An, The\n\nUse \"an\" if the word starts with the sound of a, e, i, o, u:\n\n- an apple\n- an egg\n- an ice cream shop\n- an open door\n- an umbrella\n- an hour\n\nUse \"a\" if the word starts with the sound of any other letter.\n\n- I live in the China.\n\nI live in China.\n\nDo not use \"the\" with things in general:\n\n- She likes the pizza.\n\nShe likes pizza.\n\nShe likes the pizza from Tony's Restaurant. (specific)\n\nGrammar Exercise: A, An, The\n\n$^{Do not use \"the\" with countries or cities: }$\n\n## This, That, These, Those\n\nThis\n\n1 thing - near\n\nThat\n\n1 thing - far\n\nThese\n\n2+ things - near\n\nThose\n\n2+ things - far\n\nThis apple is green.\n\npicture-4.png\n\nThat apple is red.These books are new.\n\npicture-5.png\n\nThose books are old.\n\npicture-6.png\n\npicture-7.png\n\n## Present Simple: Positive\n\nUse the present simple for things that happen regularly or things that are generally true.\n\nI / you / we / they\n\nwork\n\nhe / she / it\n\nworks\n\n## Examples:\n\n- I work in a bank.\n- He works at the university.\n- We work every day.\n- My sister works at the hospital.\n\n## Special Case #1\n\nFor verbs that end in consonant + -y, we remove the -y and add -ies:\n\n- I study English at school.\n- Dana studies English at school.\n- Bill studys English at school\n\nOther verbs like this include: cry, try, fly, carry\n\n## Special Case #2\n\nFor verbs that end in -o, -sh, -s, -ss, -ch, -x, we add -es.\n\n- They go to English class on Wednesday.\n- She goes to cooking class on Saturday.\n- She gos to cooking class on Saturday.\n\nOther verbs like this include: watch, kiss, teach, fix\n\n## Present Simple: Negative\n\nUse the present simple negative for things that are not generally true.\n\n| I             | / you / we / they   | don't   | like   |\n|---------------|---------------------|---------|--------|\n| he / she / it |                     | doesn't | like   |\n\n## Examples:\n\n- I don't like coffee.\n- John doesn't like pizza.\n- John and David don't like milk.\n- My mother doesn't like to travel.\n\n## Common Errors\n\n## 1) In the present simple negative, do not add -s:\n\n- Martha doesn't likes to dance.\n- Martha doesn't like to dance.\n\n## 2) Other common errors:\n\n- Pete no like bananas.\n- Pete not like bananas.\n- Pete doesn't like bananas.\n\n## Present Simple: Questions\n\nUse present simple questions to ask about things that happen regularly or things that are generally true.\n\nDo\n\nI / you / we / they\n\nlive in a city?\n\nDoes\n\nhe / she / it\n\nlive in a city?\n\n## Examples:\n\n-  Do you live in Brazil?\n-  Does Adam live in England?\n-  Do they live in a big house?\n-  Does she live near the beach?\n\n## Common Errors\n\n- 1) In questions, don't use -s:\n- Does she lives close to the beach?\n- Does she live close to the beach?\n- 2) Don't forget DO or DOES:\n- Clara live in a big city?\n- Does Clara live in a big city?\n\n## Present Simple: Answering Yes/No Questions\n\n- Do you have a dog? Yes, I do. / No, I don't\n- Do I look fat in these jeans? No, you don't!\n- Does John speak Italian? Yes, he does. / No, he doesn't.\n- Does she like rock music? Yes, she does. / No, she doesn't.\n- Do we watch too much TV? Yes, we do. / No, we don't.\n- Do they understand English? Yes, they do. / No, they don't.\n\n## Grammar Exercises:\n\n- Present Simple Positive\n- Present Simple Negative\n- Present Simple Questions\n\n## Can / Can't / Must / Mustn't Have to / Don't have to\n\nCan\n\nIt's OK\n\nCan't / Mustn't\n\nIt's not OK\n\nHave to / Must\n\nIt's necessary / obligatory\n\nDon't have to Doesn't have to\n\nIt's not necessary / obligatory (it's optional)\n\n(must / mustn't are more formal)\n\npicture-8.png\n\npicture-9.png\n\nYou can ride your bike here.\n\npicture-10.png\n\nYou have to stop here.\n\nYou don't have to pay\n\nYou must stop here.\n\nfor the food.\n\nYou can't smoke here. You mustn't smoke here.\n\npicture-11.png\n\n## Prepositions: In, At, On\n\npicture-12.png\n\n|    | TIME                                              | PLACE                                                  |\n|----|---------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------|\n| IN | Months In January  In October                     | Cities and countries In Tokyo  In Japan                |\n|    | Seasons In the summer  In the spring              | Rooms and buildings In the kitchen  In the supermarket |\n|    | Years In 2004  In 1986                            | Closed spaces In the car                               |\n|    | Periods of the day In the morning  In the evening | In a park                                              |\n|    | (exception:  at night )                           |                                                        |\n\n| TIME           | PLACE                                    |\n|----------------|------------------------------------------|\n| Dates and days | ON  On Monday  Transportation On the bus |\n\n| TIME   |                    | PLACE      |\n|--------|--------------------|------------|\n| AT     | At 6:00            | At school  |\n| AT     | At half past three | At work    |\n| AT     | At noon            | At a party |\n\nGrammar Exercise: Prepositions: In, On, At\n\n## Past Simple: To Be\n\n## Positive:\n\n| I               | / he / she / it  was   | born in 1982.   |\n|-----------------|------------------------|-----------------|\n| you / we / they | were                   | born in 1982.   |\n\n## Negative:\n\n| I / he / she / it   | was not (wasn't)   | born in Europe.   |\n|---------------------|--------------------|-------------------|\n| you / we / they     | were not (weren't) | born in Europe.   |\n\n## Questions:\n\n| I / he / she / it   | Was  a famous artist?   |\n|---------------------|-------------------------|\n| you / we / they     | Were  a famous artist?  |\n\n## Common words used to talk about the past:\n\n- Yesterday\n- Last Sunday / last week / last month / last November / last year\n- 1 hour ago / 5 days ago / 3 months ago / 10 years ago\n- When I was a child… / When we were in college…\n\nGrammar Exercise: Past Simple: To Be\n\n## Past Simple: Regular Verbs\n\n## Positive:\n\n## Negative:\n\n## Question:\n\n| Did   |           | / you / he / she / it /   | work      |\n|-------|-----------|---------------------------|-----------|\n|       | we / they | we / they                 | we / they |\n\n## How to form the past simple for regular verbs:\n\n| Verb         | Past             | Spelling                                                             |\n|--------------|------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|\n| listen  play | listened  played | Add -ed                                                              |\n| like  decide | liked  decided   | Add -d                                                               |\n| stop         | stopped          | One vowel + one consonant =  double the final consonant and  add -ed |\n| study  try   | studied  tried   | One consonant + y   -ied                                            |\n\n## Past Simple: Regular Verbs\n\n## In past simple negative and questions, do not add -ed:\n\n- Mary didn't liked the movie.\n- Mary didn't like the movie.\n- Did you studied for the test?\n- Did you study for the test?\n\n## Examples:\n\n- I talked with my mother last night.\n- We enjoyed the party on Saturday.\n- She finished the test early.\n- He didn't listen to the teacher's instructions.\n- They didn't want to join us for coffee.\n- Jill didn't stay in a hotel last summer.\n- Did you watch the news yesterday?\n- Did they remember to turn off the lights?\n- What time did your father arrive ?\n\nGrammar Exercise: Past Simple Regular Verbs\n\n## Past Simple: Irregular Verbs\n\n| Infinitive   | Positive   | Negative          |\n|--------------|------------|-------------------|\n| be           | was / were | wasn't / weren't  |\n| buy          | bought     | didn't buy        |\n| can          | could      | couldn't          |\n| eat          | ate        | didn't eat        |\n| get          | got        | didn't get        |\n| go           | went       | didn't go         |\n| have         | had        | didn't have       |\n| leave        | left       | didn't leave      |\n| make         | made       | didn't make       |\n| meet         | met        | didn't meet       |\n| say          | said       | didn't say        |\n| see          | saw        | didn't see        |\n| take         | took       | didn't take       |\n| think        | thought    | didn't think      |\n| understand   | understood | didn't understand |\n| wear         | wore       | didn't wear       |\n| write        | wrote      | didn't write      |\n\n## Past Simple: Irregular Verbs\n\n## Examples:\n\n- Where were you last month? I was in France.\n- What did your sister buy at the mall? She bought new shoes.\n- What time did he eat breakfast today? He ate breakfast at 6:00 AM.\n- When did you get married? We got married in July.\n- Why did she go to London? She went to London to study English.\n- Did you have any pets when you were a child? Yes, I had a dog.\n- When did he leave the meeting? He left the meeting an hour before it finished\n- What did you make for dinner? I made some vegetable soup.\n- When did you meet your best friend? I met my best friend 20 years ago.\n- What did the teacher say ? The teacher said that she loved our class.\n- Did you see Brad at the football game? No, but we saw Peter and Henry.\n- What did he wear to the wedding? He wore a suit.\n- Did he write a new book last year? No, he only wrote a few magazine articles.\n\nGrammar Exercise: Past Simple - Irregular Verbs\n\n## There is / There are\n\n|     | Singular                                              | Plural                                                      |\n|-----|-------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|\n| (+) | There's  a pillow on the sofa.                        | There are  two pillows on the bed.                          |\n| (-) | There isn't  a mirror in the  bathroom.               | There aren't  any windows in the  bedroom.                  |\n| (?) | Is there  a table?  Yes, there is. / No, there isn't. | Are there  any chairs?  Yes, there are. / No, there aren't. |\n\nThere's a pillow on the sofa.\n\npicture-13.png\n\nThere are two pillows on the bed.Is there a table? Yes, there is.\n\npicture-14.png\n\nAre there any chairs? No, there aren't.\n\npicture-15.png\n\npicture-16.png\n\n## Present Continuous: Positive\n\n## Present continuous is for things happening now, at the moment.$\\_{ }$\n\n| I               | am   | watching   |\n|-----------------|------|------------|\n| you / we / they | are  | watching   |\n| he / she / it   | is   | watching   |\n\n## Examples:\n\n- I am watching TV right now.\n- He is studying at the moment.\n- It is raining today.\n- We are thinking about you.\n- They are playing baseball.\n\n## It's very common to use contractions:\n\n- I'm watching TV right now.\n- He's studying at the moment.\n- It's raining today.\n- We're thinking about you.\n- They're playing baseball.\n\n## Some verbs are never used in the present continuous: like, want, need, believe.\n\n- I'm believing in God. I believe in God.\n- She's wanting a soda.\n\nShe wants a soda.\n\n## Present Continuous: Negative\n\n| I               | am not  (I'm not)   | listening   |\n|-----------------|---------------------|-------------|\n| you / we / they | are not             | listening   |\n|                 | (aren't)            |             |\n| he / she / it   | is not              | listening   |\n|                 | (isn't)             |             |\n\n## Examples:\n\n- I am not working at the moment.\n- She is not wearing a hat today.\n- You are not listening to the teacher.\n- Pete and Jan are not watching TV.\n\n## There are two ways to use contractions:\n\n- She 's not wearing a hat today. She isn't wearing a hat today.\n\nlistening to the teacher.\n\n- You 're not You aren't listening to the teacher.\n\nBoth forms are OK!\n\n## Present Continuous: Questions\n\nAm\n\nI\n\nworking?\n\nAre\n\nyou / we / they\n\nworking?\n\nIs\n\nhe / she / it\n\nworking?\n\n## Examples:\n\n- Are you writing a letter?\n- Is Pedro sleeping right now?\n- Are the children playing a game or reading a book?\n- Is the computer working ?\n\n## You can put a question word at the beginning:\n\n- What are you doing? I'm writing an e-mail.\n- Where is Sarah going?\n\nShe's going to the store.\n\n- Who are they talking to?\n- They're talking to the teacher.\n- Why is he running? Because he's late for work.$\\_{ }$\n\n## Grammar Exercises:\n\n- Present Continuous Positive\n- Present Continuous Negative\n- Present Continuous Questions\n\n## Present Simple or Continuous?\n\nPresent simple for things that happen in general or regularly.\n\nPresent continuous for things happening now, at the moment, or current/temporary projects.\n\n| Present Simple                                    | Present Continuous                                       |\n|---------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|\n| I  work  from 9:00 AM to 5:00 PM  every day.      | I'm  currently  working  on a new  project.              |\n| Mark  studies  English every  Tuesday night.      | Mark  is studying  the present  continuous this week.    |\n| We usually  go  to Europe in the  summer.         | Right now,  we're going  to the  supermarket.            |\n| They always  talk  to their boss in  the morning. | It's 9:00 AM.  They're talking  to  him now.             |\n| Does it usually  rain  in the winter?             | No, but  it's raining  at the  moment. Take an umbrella. |\n\nWords that are often used with the present simple or continuous:\n\n- With present simple: always, usually, often, sometimes, never, every (day/night/Monday/summer/year)\n- With present continuous: now, right now, at the moment, currently, this week/month/year, today\n\nGrammar Exercises: Present Simple or Present Continuous?\n\n## Countable and Uncountable\n\nCountable nouns are things we can count - for example, cats:\n\n- My brother has a cat.\n- My sister has two cats.\n- My friend has three cats.\n\nOther examples of countable nouns:\n\n- Things book, table, computer, banana, shirt, television, house.\n- People man, woman, child, friend, sister, uncle, teacher, boss.\n\nUncountable nouns are words that we can't count, or can't divide into separate parts:\n\n- Liquids and some foods water, butter, rice, flour, milk\n- Ideas and concepts love, fun, work, money, peace, safety\n- Information advice, information, news, knowledge\n- Categories music, furniture, equipment, jewelry, meat\n\n| Countable        | Uncountable   |\n|------------------|---------------|\n| dollar / dollars | money         |\n| song / songs     | music         |\n| table / tables   | furniture     |\n| bottle / bottles | wine, water   |\n| report / reports | information   |\n| job / jobs       | work          |\n\n## Countable and Uncountable\n\n## Don't add -s to make uncountable nouns plural:\n\n- I need some informations about the course.\n- I need some information about the course.\n\n## You can use other words to help quantify uncountable nouns:\n\n- She bought three bottles of wine and five boxes of rice.\n- He gave me two pieces of advice : eat less and exercise more.\n\nGrammar Exercise: Countable and Uncountable Nouns\n\n## Future with Going To\n\n## Use \"going to\" to talk about future plans and predictions.\n\npicture-17.png\n\nShe's going to have a baby next month.\n\npicture-18.png\n\nIt's going to rain soon.\n\n## Positive:\n\n| Full Form        | Contracted Form     |                        |\n|------------------|---------------------|------------------------|\n| I am             | I'm                 | going to               |\n| You are          | You're              | going to               |\n| He / she / it is | He's / She's / It's | take a test  tomorrow. |\n| We are           | We're               | take a test  tomorrow. |\n| They are         | They're             | take a test  tomorrow. |\n\nIn fast spoken English, \"going to\" often sounds like gonna: \"We're gonna take a test tomorrow.\"\n\nwww.espressoenglish.net\n\n## Future with Going To\n\n## Negative:\n\n| Full Form                                                                    | Contracted Form 1                                                               | Contracted Form 2                                                  |                                  |\n|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------|\n| I am  not You are  not He / she is  not It is  not We are  not They are  not | I 'm not  You 're not  He 's /  She 's not  It 's not  We 're not  They 're not | ---  You  aren't He / she  isn't It  isn't We  aren't They  aren't | going to  take a test  tomorrow. |\n\n## Question:\n\n|     | I             | Am   |\n|-----|---------------|------|\n| Are | you           | Am   |\n| Is  | he / she / it | Am   |\n| Are | we            | Am   |\n| Are | they          | Am   |\n\n## Don't forget \"am/is/are\"!\n\n- I going to buy some new shoes next week.\n- I'm going to buy some new shoes next week.\n- She not going to watch TV.\n- She's not going to watch TV.\n- They going to get married in June. They're going to get married in June.\n\nGrammar Exercise: Future with \"Going to\"\n\n## Comparative Adjectives\n\n## Use comparatives to compare two things:\n\npicture-19.png\n\n## For One-Syllable Words\n\n## Add -er\n\n| Tall   | Taller   |\n|--------|----------|\n| Old    | Older    |\n| Fast   | Faster   |\n| Long   | Longer   |\n| New    | Newer    |\n\n- My new car is faster than my old car.\n- I'm older than my brother.\n- Traveling by bike takes longer than traveling by motorcycle.\n\nPhil is older than Ben.\n\nBen is younger than Phil.\n\n## Comparative Adjectives\n\n## For Words that end in a vowel + consonant\n\n## Double the last consonant and add -er\n\nBig\n\nHot\n\nThin\n\nBigger\n\nHotter\n\nThinner\n\n- An elephant is bigger than a cat.\n- Brazil is hotter than Sweden.\n- My sister is thinner than me.\n\n## For Words that end in consonant + y\n\n## Remove -y and add -ier.\n\nEasy\n\nHappy\n\nBusy\n\nEasier\n\nHappier\n\nBusier\n\n- Reading English is easier than listening.\n- Maria is happier than Dave.\n- People today are busier than in the past.\n\n## Comparative Adjectives\n\n## For Words with 3+ syllables\n\n## Add \"more\" before the adjective:\n\nExpensive\n\nPopular\n\nInteresting\n\nMore expensive\n\nMore popular\n\nMore interesting\n\n- A car is more expensive than a computer.\n- Michael Jackson's music is more popular than country music.\n- Watching a movie is more interesting than studying grammar.\n\n## Adjectives with Irregular Comparatives\n\nGood\n\nBad\n\nFar\n\nBetter\n\nWorse\n\nFarther\n\n- Eating fruit is better for your health than eating hamburgers.\n- Cancer is worse than the flu.\n- One mile is farther than one kilometer.\n\nGrammar Exercise: Comparative Adjectives\n\n## Superlative Adjectives\n\n## Use superlatives to compare three or more things:\n\npicture-20.png\n\nJim is the oldest person in the family.\n\nKelly is the youngest person in the family.\n\n| Adjective   | Superlative        |\n|-------------|--------------------|\n| Old         | the oldest         |\n| Big         | the biggest        |\n| Easy        | the easiest        |\n| Friendly    | the friendliest    |\n| Beautiful   | the most beautiful |\n| Expensive   | the most expensive |\n| Good        | the best           |\n| Bad         | the worst          |\n| Far         | the farthest       |\n\n## Superlative Adjectives\n\n## Examples:\n\n- My grandmother is the oldest person in my family.\n- Russia is the biggest country in the world.\n- This is the easiest test I've ever taken.\n- Barry is the friendliest guy in the class.\n- Donna is the most beautiful woman I've ever seen.\n- The most expensive shoes in the world cost 1.5 million dollars.\n- I like all sports, but I like soccer the best .\n- Picking up garbage was the worst job I've ever had.\n- Australia is the farthest I've ever traveled.\n\n## Don't forget \"the\"!\n\n- I read newest lesson from Espresso English.\n- I read the newest lesson from Espresso English.\n\n## Superlatives are often used with the present perfect + ever:\n\n- This is the best sushi I've ever eaten .\n- What's the most expensive car you've ever driven ?\n- The longest book I've ever read was 500 pages.\n- Jan is the friendliest person I've ever met .\n\nGrammar Exercise: Superlative Adjectives\n\n## Adverbs\n\nUse adjectives to describe nouns (things or people).\n\nUse adverbs to describe verbs ( how a person does something):\n\n- That was a terrible game. (adjective - describes \"game\")\n- The team played terribly. (adverb - describes \"played\")\n\n## Common adverbs:\n\n| Adjective   | Adverb      |\n|-------------|-------------|\n| slow        | slowly      |\n| quiet       | quietly     |\n| bad         | badly       |\n| beautiful   | beautifully |\n| dangerous   | dangerously |\n| careful     | carefully   |\n| easy        | easily      |\n| healthy     | healthily   |\n| good        | well        |\n| fast        | fast        |\n| hard        | hard        |\n\n## Adverbs\n\n## Examples:\n\n- My grandfather drives slowly, but I drive fast.\n- The teacher spoke so quietly that I couldn't hear her.\n- I can read English well, but I speak badly.\n- Evan lives dangerously. He loves radical sports.\n- We wrote the letter carefully so as not to make a mistake.\n- I opened the jar easily.\n- Soccer players need to eat healthily to stay in good shape.\n- Janet works very hard. She arrives at work early and leaves late.\n\nAdjectives go before the noun. Adverbs usually go after the verb:\n\n- Ruth is a quiet person. (\"quiet\" describes \"person\")\n- Ruth speaks quietly. (\"quietly\" describes \"speaks\")\n\nGrammar Exercise: Adjective or Adverb?\n\n## Present Perfect: Verb be\n\nUse the present perfect in two situations:\n\n- 1)To talk about experiences in the past, when we don't know or don't say exactly when the experience happened.\n\n## Examples:\n\n- Have you been to Italy? Yes, I've been there three times.\n- Have you been to Rio de Janeiro? No, I haven't. I don't like hot weather.\n- Has Diana been to a rock concert? Yes, many times!\n- Has your brother been to a big sports event? No, he hasn't. He hates sports.\n- 2)To talk about an action or state that started in the past and continues to the present.\n\n## Examples:\n\n- How long have you been married? I've been married for five years.\n- How long has John been a teacher? He's been a teacher since last January.\n\n## Present Perfect: Verb be\n\n## Positive\n\n| Full Form                             | Short Form                       |                 |\n|---------------------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------|\n| I  have You  have We  have They  have | I 've  You 've  We 've  They 've | been  to Paris. |\n| He / she / it                         | He 's /  she 's /  it 's         | been  to Paris. |\n\n## Negative\n\n| Full Form                                             | Short Form                                           |                 |\n|-------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|\n| I  have not You  have not We  have not They  have not | I  haven't  You  haven't  We  haven't  They  haven't | been  to Paris. |\n| He / she / it  has not                                | He  /  she  /  it  hasn't                            | been  to Paris. |\n\n## Question\n\n| Auxiliary Verb   | Subject             |                 |\n|------------------|---------------------|-----------------|\n| Have             | I / you / we / they | been  to Paris? |\n| Has              | he / she / it       | been  to Paris? |\n\n## Present Perfect: Other Verbs\n\n## Regular verbs\n\n| Verb   | Past Participle   | Example                                     |\n|--------|-------------------|---------------------------------------------|\n| travel | traveled          | I 've traveled  to 15 countries in my life. |\n| watch  | watched           | She  hasn't watched  the movie yet.         |\n| pass   | passed            | We 've passed  our English test.            |\n| try    | tried             | Have  you  tried  restarting the computer?  |\n| stop   | stopped           | They 've  recently  stopped  smoking.       |\n\n## Irregular verbs\n\n| Verb   | Past    | Past Participle   |\n|--------|---------|-------------------|\n| break  | broke   | broken            |\n| buy    | bought  | bought            |\n| do     | did     | done              |\n| eat    | ate     | eaten             |\n| get    | got     | gotten            |\n| give   | gave    | given             |\n| go     | went    | gone              |\n| know   | knew    | known             |\n| leave  | left    | left              |\n| make   | made    | made              |\n| meet   | met     | met               |\n| see    | saw     | seen              |\n| take   | took    | taken             |\n| tell   | told    | told              |\n| think  | thought | thought           |\n| write  | wrote   | written           |\n\n## Present Perfect: Other Verbs\n\n## Examples:\n\n- I can't find my car keys. Have you seen them? No, I haven't . Sorry.\n- We 've written more than 100 e-mails in the past week.\n- My cousin has met a lot of famous people in her life.\n- Have you ever broken a bone? Yes, I have .\n- Has she ever eaten Vietnamese food? No, she hasn't.\n- Have you ever thought about moving to another country? We 've thought about it, but we haven't told our kids.\n- The teacher hasn't given us any homework yet.\n- Camilo has made a lot of mistakes in his life.\n- Have you ever gotten lost while driving? No, I haven't - but my mother has !\n- Kristin has never taken singing classes.\n\nGrammar Exercise: Present Perfect\n\n## Present Perfect or Past Simple\n\nUse the present perfect to talk about a general experience in the past. Use the past simple to talk about a specific moment in the past.\n\n\"Have you seen the new Mission Impossible film?\"\n\n\"Yes, I have .\"\n\n\"When did you see it?\"\n\n\"I saw it last week.\"\n\nUse the present perfect for \"unspecified\" time:\n\nI've seen the new Mission Impossible film.\n\n|-------------------? --------------|------------------------------------|\n\npast\n\npresent\n\nfuture\n\nUse the past simple for \"specified\" time:\n\nI saw the new Mission Impossible film last week .\n\n|-------------------------| -------|------------------------------------| past last week present future\n\n## Present Perfect or Past Simple\n\nUse the present perfect to talk about an action that started in the past and continues to the present. Use the past simple to talk about an action that started and finished in the past.\n\nUse the present perfect for \"unfinished\" time:\n\n\" I've lived in Brazil for three years.\" (and I live in Brazil now)\n\n|----------------|>>>>>>>>>> |------------------------------------|\n\npast\n\n3\n\nyears ago\n\npresent\n\nfuture\n\nUse the past simple for \"finished\" time:\n\n\" I lived in Brazil for three years.\" (and I don't live in Brazil now)\n\n|-------|>>>>>>>>>>| --------|-----------------------------------|\n\npast\n\nperiod of 3 years\n\npresent\n\nfuture\n\nGrammar Exercise: Present Perfect or Past Simple?\n\n## The End!\n\nThanks for reading \n\nDid you like this grammar e-book?\n\nPlease e-mail me with any questions or comments!\n\nClick here to get all the new English lessons by e-mail, and please share this e-book with all your friends.\n\n## About the teacher\n\nMy name is Shayna. I'm from the United States, and I currently live in Brazil, where I work as an English teacher and translator. I have a CELTA certification to teach English to adults, and I really enjoy helping my students communicate better.\n\npicture-21.png\n\nI am 27 years old and married, and in my free time I like to read, write, play soccer, go hiking, and do capoeira . I also love to travel and learn about different countries and cultures - please write to me and tell me where you are from. I hope you enjoy Espresso English!"